WASHINGTON — The first time President Obama sat down to pick a new Supreme Court justice, surprised aides discovered that he had gone beyond the briefing memos to read the leading candidate’s past judicial rulings. The president, a onetime constitutional law teacher, was in his element, a “legal nerd,” as one aide called him, putting theory into practice.
But if nothing else, the last seven years have made clear to Mr. Obama that the Supreme Court is anything but a nerdy, academic exercise. His current standoff with the Senate over replacing Justice Antonin Scalia culminates a profoundly consequential struggle over not just the law, but power, politics and his legacy.
During his two terms in the White House, the Supreme Court has given Mr. Obama fits, given him reprieves and now given him a new mission for his final year in office. He has publicly feuded with the court as few of his modern predecessors have. By one measure, he has enjoyed less success before the court than any president since World War II. But today his unexpected chance to remake the court depends on overcoming the formidable will of Senate Republicans.
“It’s fair to say he’s had a more contentious relationship with the court than any president I can remember, at least since Nixon,” said Curt Levey, a veteran of judicial nomination battles and executive director of the FreedomWorks Foundation, a conservative advocacy group. “This is a fight to the death for control of the Supreme Court.”
Mr. Obama arrives at this fight with a complicated history with the court. Perhaps no president since William Howard Taft, a former judge and future Supreme Court chief justice, entered the White House more immersed in constitutional theory than Mr. Obama, and few in modern times have seen theory explode into political reality more starkly.
Whatever ivory-tower romance Mr. Obama once harbored for the court has been hardened by years of conflict. The court unanimously slapped him down for exceeding his power to make recess appointments. It ruled that he overstepped by trying to force family businesses like Hobby Lobby to pay for insurance coverage of contraceptives despite their religious beliefs. The court also overturned campaign finance laws and part of the Voting Rights Act over his objections.
The court agreed with Mr. Obama on legalizing same-sex marriage and, in perhaps the most notable cases for his presidency, twice upheld the Affordable Care Act against determined conservative challenges. But even in preserving Mr. Obama’s signature domestic initiative, the court invalidated part of the health care program requiring states to expand Medicaid coverage, resulting in 19 states opting not to do so.
A study by FiveThirtyEight.com, a news analysis website, found at the end of the last court term in June that the Obama administration had won just 47 percent of the Supreme Court cases it was a party to, fewer than any of the 11 previous presidents going back to Harry S. Truman.
Until Mr. Obama, John F. Kennedy had the lowest victory rate since World War II, winning 58 percent of his cases. Ronald Reagan had the highest success rate among modern presidents, with 73 percent. Mr. Obama’s supporters attribute his record to an ideologically conservative court, while opponents say it stems from what they call the president’s aggressive abuses of power.
Mr. Obama’s more recent predecessors have struggled with the court. Bill Clinton lost a 9-to-0 decision when he tried to delay a sexual harassment lawsuit by a former Arkansas state worker until after his presidency, a lawsuit that ultimately led to the disclosure of his liaisons with Monica Lewinsky and his impeachment for perjury and obstruction of justice.
The Supreme Court ordered the end of recounts in Florida that cleared the way for George W. Bush’s ascension to the presidency, but after he took office the justices rejected his broad interpretations of his executive power to hold terror suspects at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, without judicial review and to try them before military commissions.
Mr. Obama has made his defeats into a public issue, taking his argument onto the campaign trail and chastising the justices in person at a State of the Union address for their ruling in the Citizens United campaign finance case. In publicizing that his administration had made no backup plans if his health care plan were struck down, critics said he was essentially trying to pressure the court, an interpretation his advisers reject.
Mr. Obama has experienced the court in three distinct phases — teaching constitutional law for 12 years at the University of Chicago, voting on Supreme Court nominees for four years as a senator and selecting nominees and litigating cases for seven years as president.
“When Obama taught at Chicago and when I got to know him, he was a believer in the role of the court maintaining our constitutional system and protecting constitutional rights,” said Prof. Geoffrey R. Stone, a colleague at the university. “But he was always pretty moderate in his views. He was not someone who was a strong judicial activist.”
Mr. Obama expressed reservations about the activism of Chief Justice Earl Warren’s court, although he supported its liberal rulings on segregation and civil rights. “His view was that the Warren court was too active for his taste,” Professor Stone said.
In his 2006 book, “The Audacity of Hope,” Mr. Obama suggested the left would have been better off winning battles in the electoral arena. “I wondered if, in our reliance on the courts to vindicate not only our rights but also our values, progressives had lost too much faith in democracy,” he wrote.
Still, in a 2007 speech, he said compassion, not just the letter of the law, should come into play. “We need somebody who’s got the heart, the empathy, to recognize what it’s like to be a young teenage mom,” he said. “The empathy to understand what it’s like to be poor or African-American or gay or disabled or old. And that’s the criteria by which I’m going to be selecting my judges.”
He argued the Senate had every right to block a president’s choices, even by filibuster. “Because federal judges receive lifetime appointments and often serve through the terms of multiple presidents, it behooves a president — and benefits our democracy — to find moderate nominees who can garner some measure of bipartisan support,” he wrote in his book.
He voted against the confirmation of Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and supported a filibuster against Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. that ultimately failed. From the vantage point of a president whose own nominations are subject to filibuster, Mr. Obama has come to regret his support for the Alito filibuster, his spokesman said recently.
But conservatives see his focus on empathy as code for steering cases based on desired outcomes. “On matters that he really cares about, there’s no meaningful difference between his political views and his constitutional views,” said M. Edward Whelan III, president of the Ethics & Public Policy Center and a former Scalia clerk. In effect, “the empathy standard that he’s used in nominating justices is just camouflage for judicial lawlessness.”
Mr. Obama in recent years has dropped the word “empathy” but has found other ways of expressing the sentiment. In a post last week on Scotusblog, a website that tracks the Supreme Court, Mr. Obama said he wants a justice who interprets the law and does not make it.
But some decisions, he added, “will be shaped by his or her own experience, ethics and judgment.” Justice, he added, “is not about abstract legal theory, nor some footnote in a dusty casebook. It’s the kind of life experience earned outside the classroom and the courtroom.”
Mr. Obama has had two chances until now to reorient the court through his nominations of Justices Sonia Sotomayor in 2009 and Elena Kagan a year later.
“He approached this in a very lawyerly, kind of scholarly way,” recalled Cynthia Hogan, who as a White House lawyer helped direct the process. “He was looking for someone who was going to be supersmart and approach the law in a reasonable way.”
Indeed, he disappointed some of his liberal supporters who were looking for more firebrand choices, a Justice Scalia for the left. Justices Sotomayor and Kagan have both turned out to be reliable votes for the liberal wing of the court. But because they replaced two retiring liberals, Justices David H. Souter and John Paul Stevens, their appointments merely cemented those seats for years to come rather than shifting the balance of the court.
“I’m not sure there are any important cases that have been decided since Sotomayor and Kagan joined the court that wouldn’t have turned out the same way had Souter and Stevens stayed on the court,” Professor Stone said. “So in that sense he hasn’t really changed anything. He’s kept the same balance in place.”
That is why the fight over Justice Scalia’s replacement is so momentous, magnified because two of the most significant initiatives of Mr. Obama’s presidency, on immigration and climate change, are awaiting the eventual judgment of a court now ideologically divided 4 to 4.
“This one is different,” Professor Stone said. “Obviously, the opportunity to replace Scalia is the first time he’s had a chance to affect the balance on the court. And historically, it’s potentially a very important appointment.”
